# Making decisions

## if

A program would not be very useful unless it can make decisions on it's own. For this we use the `if` command. `if` takes a "condition", a test, and if that test can evaluate to true, then `if` will run a block of code. Several new parts of the language are needed to make all this happen. Code blocks are any valid JavaScript enclosed inside a pair of `{}` (AKA squiggly brackets).  Next you need to know how to test values to see if they are true. You can do this with the double equals sign `==`. Why double? Because if you remember on the last page, we use a single equals to assign values to a variables. On `=` will assigne, two will test. Here is an example:

    var a = 5
    var b = 5
    if (a==b) {alert("yea, a is the same as b")}

Not very useful by itself, but what if we use a new function to ask users for input, the `prompt()` action. This action will tell the web browser to ask the user a question, and let them type in an answer. What ever they type will be returned to your program so you can use it. You tell `prompt` the question to ask the user and you assign it's response to a variable like this:

    var answer = prompt("What is your name?")

Lots of things going on here
1. first we declared a place to store the users answer,
2. then we send the question to ask to prompt,
3. next promote will take your question and display it to the user
4. prompt will then waits for the users answer which is returned
5. the answer is then saved to the variable `answer`.

With this knowledge, we can try something more interesting, to run with `if`:

    alert("About to ask a question")
    var answer = prompt("how many fingers do you have?")
    if (answer==10)
    {
        alert("your normal")
    }
    alert("Done asking questions")

If you have 10 fingers and you enter that into the prompt, you will see the message telling you that you are normal. If you enter in anything else, the code block is skipped. `if` has another form, a form where you can tell it what you want the code to do if the answer is false. You do this with an `else` statment like this:

    var answer = prompt("how many fingers do you have?")
    if (answer==10)
    {
        alert("you have the normal number of fingers for a human")
    }
    else
    {
        alert("you have a strange number of fingers, are must be an alien")
    }

Any operator which resolves to true or false can be used with if. You can also use multiple if/then/else statements

    var answer = prompt("how many fingers do you have?")
    if (answer==10)
    {
        alert("you have the normal number of fingers for a human")
    }
    else if (answer > 10)
    {
        alert("you have way to many fingers")
    }
    else if (answer < 10 && answer > 0)
    {
        alert("you have fewer then the standard number of fingers")
    }
    else
    {
        var response = "I think you did not answer the question correctly."
        response += "You entered in a negative number."
        response += "Maybe your not of this universe." 
        alert(response)
    }

The third `if` statment should be read as "if answer is less then 10 AND answer is greater then 0". It helps to read the clause out to yourself in english to help understand it. This is a logical AND, meaning both sides of the operator must be true for the calculation to be true.

AND, written in JavaScript as `&&`, is a mathematical operation like `+`. It takes two things and gives a value and is used to make sure that both values are true at the same time. Another choice would be to use "OR", written as `||`, which means that either or both must be true for the answer to be true. An example of OR statment would be to collect all the wrong answers into one statment and then use the `else` for all the good cases like this:

    var answer = prompt("How old are you")
    if (answer<0 || answer>150)
    {
        alert("You did not enter in a valid number")
    }
    else
    {
        alert("You are " + answer + " years old.")
    }

## Things to know from here

* On web pages `promtp()` can be used to ask questions
* if/then/else statements are used everywhere, you must practice with these
* you should check out the [operator list](a-operators.md) and try many of them out

---
* [previous](03-variables.md)
* [next](05-loops.md)
